Date: 2010-05-16 03:51:56
Author: Matt Sanford
Title: The Honest Omnivore

I have many friends who are vegetarian to one degree or another and I'm happy
to accommodate that. I respect their choice in the same way they respect mine.
In asking around about people's dietary restrictions over the years I've found
a group who annoy me: The Dishonest Omnivore.

I am an omnivore and I'm not ashamed. I'm also not squeamish about where my
food comes from. I know that pork used to be a pig, beef a cow. I can't say I
love the feel of raw chicken in my hands. What I can say is that I like the
taste of chicken more than I dislike dealing with it in the raw … and because
of that I'm unashamed to be an omnivore.

## Burgers Shaped Like Cows

Anybody who has talked about food with me has heard my rant about burgers
shaped like cows. Well, that pretty much the gist of this post and it sums up
my feelings. If you order a hamburger you need to be comfortable with the fact
you're eating what was formerly a cow (or, depending on where you order it,
several different cows). If you ordered and someone told you the cow's name
was "Bessy", would you order something else? If so, perhaps vegetarianism is
for you. Vegetarian food is just as tasty, sustaining and filling as the
omnivore diet.

As time has progressed we've become farther and farther removed from the
source of our food. Where our parent or grandparents might have raised live
stock, today the vast majority of us don't have that sort of connection to our
food source. There has been a local food movement brewing, mostly focused on
fruits and vegetables. This movement has been about distance in the
traditional land area sense … I want less distance in the mental sense. I want
to think about the previous form of my food. Be it vegetable:

![Brussels Sprouts on the Vine](the-honest-omnivore/800px-brusselssprouts-onvine.jpg)

or animal:

![British Pork Cuts](the-honest-omnivore/500px-british_pork_cuts-svg.png)

But let's be honest – nobody is squeamish about what a vegetable looked like
in the field.

