---
date: 2011-06-15 09:54:55
title: Crowdsourcing vs. Community

permalink: blog/crowdsourcing-vs-community/index.html
layout: post
---

This is post is about how I have come to use the words "crowdsourced" and
"community" to distinguish different, but related, activities. I've been
working on Twitter's community translation tools since before they were
launched and this is a lesson I've learned during that time. This all started
with my reply to a [Quora topic](http://www.quora.com/What-key-benefits-did-Twitter-and-Facebook-uncover-in-crowdsourcing-their-translations)  and much of
the information was already covered there. But since Quora is a smaller
community than the web at large I wanted to re-format the information for
widest consumption and change some of the examples to be a little bit clearer.

## Expanding on my Quora answer

As I mentioned above I've been working on Twitter's community translation
tools from the beginning. I originally called it "crowdsourced translation"
but over time I've come to call it "community translation" and appreciate the
subtle difference between the two terms, or at least started using them to
mean two slightly different, but similar, things. The explanation of that
difference explains is a little interesting but it's most interesting because
it highlights the biggest benefits Twitter has seen from translating this way.

I see "crowdsourcing" as an activity that requires very** little or no prior
knowledge** of the problem space at hand and which can benefit solely from a
wealth of different opinions/views/activities. A great example of this is
search engine relevance evaluations. At their most basic these evaluations ask
a group of people to search for a term and mark different links on the results
as on- or off-topic. In more complicated scenarios they ask the participants
to re-order the links into the "best" order, or to compare two result pages
side-by-side and pick which is best. In all of these scenarios the activity
does not require that the person have any idea how search engines work. You're
not asking an expert in the field to evaluate something, you're asking the
largest, most diverse group possible to evaluate it so you can understand the
problem.

In the case of Twitter's Translation Center we rely heavily on our user's
**prior knowledge** of Twitter itself. While that might seem like a minor
difference it matches exactly what Nicholas Muldoon said above about Atlassian
in the [original Quora topic](http://www.quora.com/What-key-benefits-did-Twitter-and-Facebook-uncover-in-crowdsourcing-their-translations), "_translations provided by our Language Service Provider were not translated
by people who used the product_". Twitter has also experimented with Language
Service Providers (LSPs) and they do a great job at some types of tasks, while
at others they don't. The reason I now call it "community translation" is that
we have taken an existing community of users and asked them to help based on
prior knowledge. We did not take a group of people at random, but an existing
community (bi-lingual Twitter users). We also didn't take a collection of
professional translators because while our task is translation our actual
problem space is actually Twitter, and how it uses language.

One quick example to highlight the difference in community translation quality
versus professional translators: Twitter uses the word "_unfollow_" to label
the button that stops following another account. If you ask an LSP to
translate this they will likely return a phrase such as "_Nicht mehr folgen_"
in German. If you ask a translator (or linguist) directly they will probably
point out that "_unfollow_" isn't a word. Twitter's language is very informal
in English and community translation has helped us keep that playful tone in
every language (even the ungrammatical "_Entfolgen_" in German). This might
seem like a small thing but the consistency of product language with the
product itself is really the key to translation quality. The localization
industry has known this for ages and has made great strides in "source
document quality" to that end (limited grammars, style guides, etc.).

As Alex Lane said in the original Quora topic nobody is crowdsourcing
advertising, accounting or legal translation work (he might have meant the
functions and not translations, but I took it to mean translation). Even
Twitter does not do that because the language of those domains is formal. Our
community of translators are an asset because they know our domain so well.
They don't know those more formal domains so they would do as poorly at those
as an LSP does with things like "_unfollow_".
